---
title: Routes
---

The tools' names accord to their function.

# routecheck.py

Allows to verify whether routes within the given route-file(s) are valid
for the given network. Call(s):

```
python tools\route\routecheck.py <net> <vehicletypes> [-f|--fix] <routes>+
```

```
python tools\route\routecheck.py <net> <vehicletypes+routes>
```

If a route is broken (or disconnected), the tool gives a warning, e.g.: "Warning: 
Route for vehicle 0 disconnected between startEdge and endEdge"

If **--fix** (**-f**) is given, routes are tried to be repaired
(assuming only one link is missing). The name of the output file(s) is
generated by appending ".fixed". These file contain repaired routes (if
it was possible), each appended link is written in comments after the
vehicle.

## Known caveats

- The tool does not deal with vehicle types; it only checks whether
  routes are connected
- When working in **--fix**-mode a vehicle type file must be given
- No tests for dealing with networks that have internal edges

# findAllRoutes.py

The tool determines all possible routes between the given source and target edges. Example:

```
python tools/findAllRoutes.py -n <net-file> -o <output-file> -s <source-edges> -t <target-edges>
```

# analyzePersonPlans.py
Count the different types of person plans according to the sequence of used modes. Private rides are distinguished from public transport rides using the assumption that the name of the private vehicle will start with the name of the person (as happens for [duarouter](../duarouter.md)-generated person plans).
```
python tools\route\analyzePersonPlans.py -r routes.xml
```
example output:
```
34: walk public walk
55: car walk
90: walk
```

# routes_Join.py

Joins routes belonging to two networks. A map file with the following
syntax is read first:

```
<EDGE_ID>-><EDGE_ID>
```

It describes at which edges the networks overlapped and which edge was
kept in the resulting one. Vehicles from both given route files starting
at the first of those edges will be at first not regarded, but their
routes are kept in memory. All other vehicles are kept, but if they pass
one of the mapped edges, the route is continued by choosing a random
route from the list of previously discarded ones which start at the
corresponding edge.

```
python tools\route\routes_Join.py <prefix#1> <routes#1> <prefix#2> <routes#2> <mapfile>
```

- <prefix\#1\>: The prefix to use for vehicles from the first routes
  file
- <routes\#1\>: The first routes file
- <prefix\#2\>: The prefix to use for vehicles from the second routes
  file
- <routes\#2\>: The second routes file
- <mapfile\>: The edge mapping

Attention\! The routes are not sorted in time\!

# sort_routes.py

This script sorts the vehicles in the given route file by their depart
time. If the option **--big** is supplied, a slow but memory efficient algorithm
is used.

```
python tools/route/sort_routes.py input.rou.xml -o output.rou.xml
```

# cutRoutes.py

This script cuts down routes from a large scenario to a sub-scenario.
This assumes the existence of a big scenario (*orig.net.xml* and
*orig.rou.xml*). The goal is to simulate only a smaller part of the
network (*reduced.net.xml*) keeping all of the routes that pass through
the reduced network. Output can be a route file or a trip file.
Depending on the given options the new departure times can be computed
from exitTimes (see [sumo](../sumo.md) option **--vehroute-output.exit-times**), extrapolated from
the original network or simply copied from the original departure times.
If the option **--big** is supplied, a slow but memory efficient algorithm is used
for sorting the output by departure time. Example usage

```
python tools/route/cutRoutes.py reduced.net.xml orig.rou.xml 
  --routes-output output.rou.xml --orig-net orig.net.xml
```

Filtering stopping places is also supported by setting the options **--additional-input** and **--stops-output**.

# splitRouteFiles.py

This script splits a list of route files (e.g. coming from [duarouter](../duarouter.md))
by start time. If a detector file is given, the routes will be also split by 
the edges with detectors. Example:

```
python tools/route/splitRouteFiles.py <route-files>
```

As default, the routes will be split in steps of 900 seconds. This can be changed
with the option **-s**. 
The detector file can be loaded with the option **-f**. Example:

```
python tools/route/splitRouteFiles.py <route-files> -f <detector-file>
```

# routeStats.py

Compute a length-histogram for all routes in a given route file.
Alternatively, compute the difference in lengths for two route files
with the same vehicles. Routes must be child elements of `<vehicle>`-elements.
Output for plotting may also be generated (see **--help**).

```
python tools/route/routeStats.py <net-file> <route-file>
```

When setting option **--attribute depart** a histogram on departure times (or departure time
differences) is generated instead.

# routecompare.py

This script compares two route sets by calculating
a similarity for any two routes based on the number of common edges
and determining a maximum weighted matching between the route sets.
It needs at least two parameters, which are the route sets to compare.
Optionally a district file may be given, then only routes with
the same origin and destination district are matched.

```
python tools/route/routecompare.py routes.rou.xml routes2.rou.xml
```

# route2poly.py

Transform routes into polygons for visualization in
[sumo-gui](../sumo-gui.md). Using the options **--hue, --saturation, --brightness** the colors can be
controlled. Each of these options supports values from \[0, 1\] as well
as the special value *random*.

```
python tools/route/route2poly.py <net-file> <route-file>
```

# route2sel.py

Transform routes into an edge selection file which contains all edges
used in any of the routes, trips or person plans. This file may be used
for visualization in [sumo-gui](../sumo-gui.md) or pruning a
network via [netconvert](../netconvert.md).

```
python tools/route/route2sel.py <route-file> -o usedEdges.txt
```

```
netconvert --net-file <net-file> --keep-edges.input-file usedEdges.txt --output reduced.net.xml
```

# route_departOffset

Shifts the departure times of `<vehicle>`, `<trip>`, and `<flow>` elements by a specified amount.
When setting the option **--depart-edges Edge1,Edge2,...**, only vehicles that depart on one of the given
edges are affected.

```
python tools/route/route_departOffset.py --input-file <route-file> --output-file shifted.rou.xml --depart-offset 900
```

The option **--depart-interval a,b,c,d** shifts all departures within the interval \[a,b\[ to the
interval \[c,d\[.

```
python tools/route/route_departOffset.py --input-file <route-file> --output-file shifted.rou.xml --depart-interval 3600,7200,0,500
```

# route_1htoDay
Uses "route_departOffset.py" for building 24 route files which describe a whole day assuming the given route files describes an hour.

```
python tools/route/route_1htoDay.py <route-file>
```

# route2alts.py

Counts possible routes for all depart/arrival edges.
Builds route alternatives assigning the so determined probabilities to use a route.
Please note that the cost of the route is not computed!

```
python tools/route/route2alts.py <route-file>
```

# countEdgeUsage.py

Generates a [visualization](../sumo-gui.md#visualizing_edge-related_data) file for investigating traffic patterns in a
route file.

```
python tools/countEdgeUsage.py <route-file> --output-file <output-file>
```

The option **--intermediate** may be used to include the total number of passing vehicles
for each edge in the generated output.

The generated file *result.xml* can be loaded in [sumo-gui to color
edges by number of departs, arrivals or total number of passing
vehicles](../sumo-gui.md#visualizing_edge-related_data)

When investigating routes that pass a particular edge or intersection,
the input routes may be filtered using the option **--subpart** {{DT_STR}}:

```
python tools/countEdgeUsage.py <route-file> --output-file <output-file> --subpart edge3,edge4,edge5
```

This will only generate results for routes that contain the edge
sequence *edge3 edge4 edge5*.

# addParkingAreaStops2Routes.py

Declares a vehicle to stop in one or more parking areas (separated by comma).

```
python tools/addParkingAreaStops2Routes.py -r <route-file> -p <parking-areas> -d <duration in seconds> [-o <output-file>]
```

The stop will be added to the vehicles route, if the id of the given parking area is part of the vehicle id. Example:

```xml
<routes>
    <vehicle id="0_parkingAreaA" depart="0">
      <route edges="e1 e2 e3"/>
    </vehicle>
    <vehicle id="1" depart="0">
      <route edges="e1 e2 e3"/>
    </vehicle>
</routes>
```

```
python tools/route/addParkingAreaStops2Routes.py -r <route-file> -p ParkingAreaA -d 3600 [-o <output-file>]
```

```xml
<routes>
    <vehicle id="0_parkingAreaA" depart="0">
      <route edges="e1 e2 e3"/>
      <stop parkingArea="parkingAreaA" duration="3600">
    </vehicle>
    <vehicle id="1" depart="0">
      <route edges="e1 e2 e3"/>
    </vehicle>
</routes>
```

This only adds a stop at **parkingAreaA** to the vehicle with id **0_parkingAreaA**.
Note, that the lane of that parking area must belong to one of the edges
"e1, e2, e3" of the vehicles route.

# addParkingAreaStops2Trips.py

Add a stop over parking in all trips given in input file 

```
python tools/route/addParkingAreaStops2Trips.py -r <route-file> -p <parking-areas> -d <duration in seconds> [-o <output-file>]
```

The stop will be added to the trip route.

```xml
<routes>
    <trip id="vehicle_0" depart="0.00" from="WC" to="CN"/>
</routes>
```

```
python tools/route/addParkingAreaStops2Routes.py -r <route-file> -p <parkings-file> -d 1800 [-o <output-file>]
```

```xml
<routes>
    <trip depart="0.00" from="WC" id="vehicle_0" to="CN">
        <stop duration="1800" parkingArea="parkingArea_WC_3_0"/>
    </trip>
</routes>
```

This only adds a stop at **parkingAreaA** to the vehicle with id **0_parkingAreaA**.
Note, that the lane of that parking area must belong to one of the edges
"e1, e2, e3" of the vehicles route.

# addStops2Routes.py

Declares vehicles to stop at the end of their route (or at some other defined / random location).

```
python tools/route/addStops2Routes.py -n <net-file> -r <route-file> -t <vType-file> -o <output-file> -d <stop duration in seconds> -u <stop until time>
```

Either the "duration" or "until" for stop must be given. Using the option **-p**, the vehicle stops besides the road without blocking other vehicles. Example:

```xml
<routes>
    <vehicle id="0" depart="0">
      <route edges="e1 e2 e3"/>
    </vehicle>
</routes>
```

```
python tools/route/addStops2Routes.py -n <net-file> -r <route-file> -t <vType-file> -o <output-file> -p --duration 1800 --until 12:0:0
```

```xml
<routes>
    <vehicle depart="0" id="0" type="type1">
        <route edges="SC CN"/>
        <stop lane="CN_2" parking="true" duration="1800" until="12:0:0"/>
    </vehicle>
</routes>
```

## Random stopping

The following options can be used to randomize the added stops:

- **--probability**: Randomly adds a stop for each vehicle with probability in `[0,1]`
- **--reledge random**: Adds stop on a random edge along the route
- **--relpos random**: Adds stop on random offset along the edge
- **--lane random**: Adds stop on random (permitted) lane of the stop edge

## Stationary traffic

Instead of modifying a given route file by adding stops, the tool can also synthesize vehicles to fill up a given list of parkingAreas. This requires the option **--parking-areas FILE** to be set. The generated vehicles will have a stop with the configured duration/until time and leave the simulation after stopping.

- **--abs-occupancy** : generate the given number of vehicles for each parkingArea
- **--rel-occupancy** : generate vehicles to fill each parkingArea to the given relative capacity
- **--abs-free** : generate vehicles to have the given number of free spaces for each parking area

## Further Options

- **--parking-areas FILE**: Load additional file with parking area definitions. If the final edge of a vehicle has a parkingArea, this will be used as the destination
- **--person-duration**, **--person-until**: if set, any persons in the input will receive a `<stop>` as the last element of their plan
- **--start-at-stop**: if set, vehicle routes will be shortened so they start at the final edge. This can be used to define stationary traffic which fills up parkingAreas without driving around.

# vehicle2flow.py

This tool transforms every vehicle definition to a flow definition with the configured end time and period (depart is used as begin time).

```
python tools/route/vehicles2flow.py <route-file> -o <output-route-file> -e <end-time> -r <repeat-period>
```

# tracegenerator.py

This creates a list of (geo) coordinates from an input route file and and a network.

```
python tools/route/tracegenerator.py -n <net-file> -r <route-file> -o <output-trace-file>
```

# tracemapper.py

This script maps a list of (geo) coordinates to a consecutive list of
edges in a given network (a route)

```
python tools/route/tracemapper.py -n <net-file> -t <trace-file> -o <route-output-file>
```

The input contains the coordinates for every vehicle in a single line.
Example:

```
vehicle1:363.66,497.79 2008.64,498.82
vehicle2:363.66,497.79 1498.46,989.78 2008.64,498.82
```

As an alternative input, [fcd-output](../Simulation/Output/FCDOutput.md) files (or similar files that contain attributes `id`, `x` and `y`) are supported.

The output is a standard sumo route file

```xml
<routes>
    <route id="vehicle1" edges="beg rend"/>
    <route id="vehicle2" edges="beg left2end rend"/>
</routes>
```

The option **--geo** enables the conversion of the input coordinates with
the parameters given in the network. If a [vehicle class](../Definition_of_Vehicles,_Vehicle_Types,_and_Routes.md#abstract_vehicle_class) is supplied using 
the option **--vehicle-class**, the mapping algorithm will consider only edges where 
this vehicle class is allowed. If the network contains many multi-lane edges, it 
may be beneficial to increase the accepted **--delta** distance between trace points and 
the edge reference line. The mapping algorithm is also available in the 
python library function sumolib.route.mapTrace.

# tlsCycleAdaptation.py

This script is to adapt the cycle lengths of the signalized
intersections according to a given network and route file. The Webster's
equation is used to optimize the cycle length and the green times of the
traffic lights. Only one hour traffic volume is considered and PCE is
used instead of the number of vehicles when calculating traffic volumes.
The output will be saved in a xml-file and can be directly used as
additional file in SUMO. The call is

```
python tools/tlsCycleAdaptation.py -n <net-file> -r <route-file> -b <begin>
```

The signalization parameters, such as minimal green time, lost time,
yellow time, maximal and minimal cycles, can be adjusted with the use of
options. Option R is to restrict the maximal cycle length as the given
one, while Option u is to use the calculated max cycle length as the
cycle length for all intersections. With Option e only the green time
splits will be adapted.

# implausibleRoutes.py

This tool analyzes a give route file and computes a implausibility score for each route.
```
python tools/route/implausibleRoutes.py <net-file> <route-file>
```

The implausibility score is a weighted sum of individual measures of implausibility (with configurable weights):

- The quotient of (routeLength / airDistance)
- The relative detour time: (routeDuration / shortestRouteDuration)
- The absolute detour time: (routeDuration - shortestRouteDuration)
- Short route penalty: max(0, minimumDistanceParameter - routeDistance)
- Short air-distance penalty: max(0, minimumAirDistanceParameter - routeAirDistance)

The tool reports routes with an implausibility score above a given threshold.
It can also be used to generated restrictions for [flowrouter](Detector.md#flowrouterpy).

!!! caution
    When using a route file with named routes (i.e. flowrouter **--routes-output**), the option **--standalone** must be set.
    

# addStopDelay.py

This tool adds a random delay to some or all stops that have a 'duration' value by increasing the duration
```
python tools/route/addStopDelay.py -r <route-file> -o <output-route-file>
```

The delays are sampled from a [truncated Normal distribution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truncated_normal_distribution) with parameters set via options
**--mean FLOAT, --dev FLOAT, --min FLOAT, --max FLOAT**. In the special case where min=max, a fixed delay is added.
By setting option **--probability FLOAT**, stops only receive a delay with the given probability.#

# checkStopOrder.py

This tool reads a [public transport schedule for vehicles or trips](../Simulation/Public_Transport.md#single_vehicles_and_trips) and checks whether the time spent at the same stop by different vehicles is overlapping. This occurrence may be expected for bus lines but typically indicates a data error for a railway schedule (unless [portion working](../Simulation/Railways.md#portion_working) takes place).
```
python tools/route/checkStopOrder.py -r <route-file>
```

When setting option **--stop-table STOP_ID** a time table for all vehicles that service the given `<busStop>`-id is written to standard output.

# splitRandom.py

This tool splits a route file in two different route files
```
python tools/route/splitRandom.py -r <route-file> -a <first output file> -b <second output file> -n <number of trips in second file>
```

# addTAZ.py

This tool adds 'fromTaz' and 'toTaz' information to vehicles in a route file.
```
python tools/route/addTAZ.py -r <route-file> -a <taz-file> -o <output-file>
```

# route2OD.py

This tool generates a [tazRelation-file (OD-Matrix)](../Demand/Importing_O/D_Matrices.md#tazrelation_format) from a taz-file and route-file.
```
python tools/route/route2OD.py -r <route-file> -a <taz-file> -o <output-file>
```

Not only route file but also trip file can be used as input. The tool will firstly try to find the start edge and the end edge of each trip or flows and match them to the respective origin and destination TAZ according to the input taz-file. The counts of the TAZ-relations will be calculated and saved. If only TAZ-information in the given trip or route file is available, this tool will directly calculate TAZ-based OD relation counts without using the information in the given taz-file, which connection edges locate in each TAZ. If the option **--edge-relations** is set, edge-based relation counts will be calculated and saved, only when start/end edge information is available. 

When option **--interval TIME** (short **-i**) is set, the OD-Matrix will be split into time slices of the given duration.

